README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file and knit again -->
<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-stable-brightgreen.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#stable)
[![CRAN_Status_Badge](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/heplots)](http://cran.r-project.org/package=heplots)
[![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/heplots)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=heplots)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL%20%28%3E=%202%29-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/13908453.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/13908453)
<!-- badges: end -->

# heplots <img src="man/figures/logo.png" height="200" style="float:right; height:200px;" />

## **Visualizing Hypothesis Tests in Multivariate Linear Models**

Version 1.4-0

## Description

The `heplots` package provides functions for visualizing hypothesis
tests in multivariate linear models (MANOVA, multivariate multiple
regression, MANCOVA, and repeated measures designs).

HE plots represent sums-of-squares-and-products matrices for linear
hypotheses (**H**) and for error (**E**) using ellipses (in two
dimensions), ellipsoids (in three dimensions), or by line segments in
one dimension. For the theory and applications, see:

-   Fox, Friendly and Monette (2009) for a brief introduction,
-   Friendly (2010) for the application of these ideas to repeated
    measure designs,
-   Friendly, Monette and Fox (2013) for a general discussion of the
    role of elliptical geometry in statistical understanding, and
-   Friendly & Sigal (2017) for an applied R tutorial.

Other topics now addressed here include:

-   robust MLMs, using iteratively re-weighted least squared to
    down-weight observations with large multivariate residuals,
    `robmlm()`.
-   `Mahalanobis()` calculates classical and robust Mahalanobis squared
    distances using MCD and MVE estimators of center and covariance.
-   visualizing tests for equality of covariance matrices in MLMs (Box’s
    M test), `boxM()` and `plot.boxM()`.
-   $\chi^2$ Q-Q plots for MLMs (`cqplot()`) to detect outliers and
    assess multivariate normality of residuals.
-   bivariate coefficient plots showing elliptical confidence regions
    (`coefplot()`).

In this respect, the `heplots` package now aims to provide a wide range
of tools for analyzing and visualizing multivariate response linear
models.

-   The related [`candisc`](http://github.com/friendly/candisc) package
    provides HE plots in **canonical discriminant** space, the space of
    linear combinations of the responses that show the maximum possible
    effects and for canonical correlation in multivariate regression
    designs.

-   Another package,
    [`mvinfluence`](https://friendly.github.io/mvinfluence/), provides
    diagnostic measures and plots for influential observations in MLM
    designs.

Several tutorial vignettes are also included. See
`vignette(package="heplots")`.

## Installation

|                     |                                               |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| CRAN version        | `install.packages("heplots")`                 |
| Development version | `remotes::install_github("friendly/heplots")` |

<!-- This installs the package from the source and creates the package vignettes,  -->
<!-- so you will need to have R Tools installed on your system.  [R Tools for Windows](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/) -->
<!-- takes you to the download page for Windows.  [R Tools for Mac OS X](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/macosx/tools/) -->
<!-- has the required programs for Mac OS X. -->

## HE plot functions

The graphical functions contained here all display multivariate model
effects in variable (**data**) space, for one or more response variables
(or contrasts among response variables in repeated measures designs).

-   `heplot()` constructs two-dimensional HE plots for model terms and
    linear hypotheses for pairs of response variables in multivariate
    linear models.

-   `heplot3d()` constructs analogous 3D plots for triples of response
    variables.

-   The `pairs` method, `pairs.mlm()` constructs a scatterplot matrix of
    pairwise HE plots.

-   `heplot1d()` constructs 1-dimensional analogs of HE plots for model
    terms and linear hypotheses for single response variables.

## Other functions

-   `glance.mlm()` extends `broom::glance.lm()` to multivariate response
    models, giving a one-line statistical summary for each response
    variable.

-   `boxM()` Calculates Box’s *M* test for homogeneity of covariance
    matrices in a MANOVA design. A `plot` method displays a visual
    representation of the components of the test. Associated with this,
    `bartletTests()` and `levineTests()` give the univariate tests of
    homogeneity of variance for each response measure in a MLM.

-   `covEllipses()` draw covariance (data) ellipses for one or more
    group, optionally including the ellipse for the pooled within-group
    covariance.

### Repeated measure designs

For repeated measure designs, between-subject effects and within-subject
effects must be plotted separately, because the error terms (**E**
matrices) differ. For terms involving within-subject effects, these
functions carry out a linear transformation of the matrix **Y** of
responses to a matrix **Y M**, where **M** is the model matrix for a
term in the intra-subject design and produce plots of the H and E
matrices in this transformed space. The vignette `"repeated"` describes
these graphical methods for repeated measures designs. (At present, this
vignette is only available at [HE plots for repeated measures
designs](http://www.jstatsoft.org/v37/i04/paper).)

## Datasets

The package also provides a large collection of data sets illustrating a
variety of multivariate linear models of the types listed above,
together with graphical displays.

<!--
dsets <- vcdExtra::datasets("heplots")[, c("Item", "dim", "Title")]
rowcols <- as.data.frame(stringr::str_split_fixed(dsets$dim,"x", 2))
colnames(rowcols) <- c("rows", "cols")

dsets.table <- cbind("dataset" = dsets$Item, rowcols, "title" =dsets$Title)
knitr::kable(dsets.table)
-->

| dataset                                                                               | rows | cols | title                                                       | tags             |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----:|-----:|:------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------|
| [AddHealth](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/AddHealth.html)               | 4344 |    3 | Adolescent Health Data                                      | MANOVA ordered   |
| [Adopted](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Adopted.html)                   |   62 |    6 | Adopted Children                                            | MMRA repeated    |
| [Bees](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Bees.html)                         |  246 |    6 | Captive and maltreated bees                                 | MANOVA           |
| [Diabetes](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Diabetes.html)                 |  145 |    6 | Diabetes Dataset                                            | MANOVA           |
| [FootHead](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/FootHead.html)                 |   90 |    7 | Head measurements of football players                       | MANOVA contrasts |
| [Headache](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Headache.html)                 |   98 |    6 | Treatment of Headache Sufferers for Sensitivity to Noise    | MANOVA repeated  |
| [Hernior](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Hernior.html)                   |   32 |    9 | Recovery from Elective Herniorrhaphy                        | MMRA candisc     |
| [Iwasaki_Big_Five](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Iwasaki_Big_Five.html) |  203 |    7 | Personality Traits of Cultural Groups                       | MANOVA           |
| [MockJury](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/MockJury.html)                 |  114 |   17 | Effects Of Physical Attractiveness Upon Mock Jury Decisions | MANOVA candisc   |
| [NLSY](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/NLSY.html)                         |  243 |    6 | National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Data                  | MMRA             |
| [NeuroCog](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/NeuroCog.html)                 |  242 |   10 | Neurocognitive Measures in Psychiatric Groups               | MANOVA candisc   |
| [Oslo](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Oslo.html)                         |  332 |   14 | Oslo Transect Subset Data                                   | MANOVA candisc   |
| [Parenting](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Parenting.html)               |   60 |    4 | Father Parenting Competence                                 | MANOVA contrasts |
| [Plastic](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Plastic.html)                   |   20 |    5 | Plastic Film Data                                           | MANOVA           |
| [Pottery2](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Pottery2.html)                 |   48 |   12 | Chemical Analysis of Romano-British Pottery                 | MANOVA candisc   |
| [Probe1](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Probe1.html)                     |   11 |    5 | Response Speed in a Probe Experiment                        | MANOVA repeated  |
| [Probe2](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Probe2.html)                     |   20 |    6 | Response Speed in a Probe Experiment                        | MANOVA repeated  |
| [RatWeight](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/RatWeight.html)               |   27 |    6 | Weight Gain in Rats Exposed to Thiouracil and Thyroxin      | MANOVA repeated  |
| [ReactTime](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/ReactTime.html)               |   10 |    6 | Reaction Time Data                                          | repeated         |
| [Rohwer](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Rohwer.html)                     |   69 |   10 | Rohwer Data Set                                             | MMRA MANCOVA     |
| [RootStock](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/RootStock.html)               |   48 |    5 | Growth of Apple Trees from Different Root Stocks            | MANOVA contrasts |
| [Sake](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Sake.html)                         |   30 |   10 | Taste Ratings of Japanese Rice Wine (Sake)                  | MMRA             |
| [Skulls](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Skulls.html)                     |  150 |    5 | Egyptian Skulls                                             | MANOVA contrasts |
| [SocGrades](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/SocGrades.html)               |   40 |   10 | Grades in a Sociology Course                                | MANOVA candisc   |
| [SocialCog](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/SocialCog.html)               |  139 |    5 | Social Cognitive Measures in Psychiatric Groups             | MANOVA candisc   |
| [TIPI](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/TIPI.html)                         | 1799 |   16 | Data on the Ten Item Personality Inventory                  | MANOVA candisc   |
| [VocabGrowth](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/VocabGrowth.html)           |   64 |    4 | Vocabulary growth data                                      | repeated         |
| [WeightLoss](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/WeightLoss.html)             |   34 |    7 | Weight Loss Data                                            | repeated         |
| [mathscore](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/mathscore.html)               |   12 |    3 | Math scores for basic math and word problems                | MANOVA           |
| [schooldata](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/schooldata.html)             |   70 |    8 | School Data                                                 | MMRA robust      |

## Examples

This example illustrates HE plots using the classic `iris` data set. How
do the means of the flower variables differ by `Species`? This dataset
was the imputus for R. A. Fisher (1936) to propose a method of
discriminant analysis using data collected by Edgar Anderson (1928).
Though some may rightly deprecate Fisher for being a supporter of
eugenics, Anderson’s `iris` dataset should not be blamed.

A basic HE plot shows the **H** and **E** ellipses for the first two
response variables (here: `Sepal.Length` and `Sepal.Width`). The
multivariate test is significant (by Roy’s test) *iff* the **H** ellipse
projects *anywhere* outside the **E** ellipse.

The positions of the group means show how they differ on the two
response variables shown, and provide an interpretation of the
orientation of the **H** ellipse: it is long in the directions of
differences among the means.

``` r
iris.mod <- lm(cbind(Sepal.Length, Sepal.Width, Petal.Length, Petal.Width) ~ 
                 Species, data=iris)
heplot(iris.mod)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-iris1-1.png" width="70%" />

Contrasts or other linear hypotheses can be shown as well, and the
ellipses look better if they are filled. We create contrasts to test the
differences between `versacolor` and `virginca` and also between
`setosa` and the average of the other two. Each 1 df contrast plots as
degenerate 1D ellipse– a line.

Because these contrasts are orthogonal, they add to the total 2 df
effect of `Species`. Note how the first contrast, labeled `V:V`,
distinguishes the means of *versicolor* from *virginica*; the second
contrast, `S:VV` distinguishes `setosa` from the other two.

``` r
par(mar=c(4,4,1,1)+.1)
contrasts(iris$Species)<-matrix(c(0, -1, 1, 
                                  2, -1, -1), nrow=3, ncol=2)
contrasts(iris$Species)
#>            [,1] [,2]
#> setosa        0    2
#> versicolor   -1   -1
#> virginica     1   -1
iris.mod <- lm(cbind(Sepal.Length, Sepal.Width, Petal.Length, Petal.Width) ~ 
                 Species, data=iris)

hyp <- list("V:V"="Species1","S:VV"="Species2")
heplot(iris.mod, hypotheses=hyp, 
       fill=TRUE, fill.alpha=0.1)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-iris2-1.png" width="70%" />

All pairwise HE plots are produced using the `pairs` method for MLM
objects.

``` r
pairs(iris.mod, hypotheses=hyp, hyp.labels=FALSE,
      fill=TRUE, fill.alpha=0.1)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-iris3-1.png" width="100%" />

## References

Anderson, E. (1928). The Problem of Species in the Northern Blue Flags,
Iris versicolor L. and Iris virginica L. *Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden*, **13**, 241–313.

Fisher, R. A. (1936). The Use of Multiple Measurements in Taxonomic
Problems. *Annals of Eugenics*, **8**, 379–388.

Fox, J.; Friendly, M. & Monette, G. (2009). [Visualizing hypothesis
tests in multivariate linear models: The heplots package for
R](http://datavis.ca/palers/FoxFriendlyMonette-2009.pdf) *Computational
Statistics*, **24**, 233-246.

Friendly, M. (2010). [HE plots for repeated measures
designs](http://www.jstatsoft.org/v37/i04/paper). *Journal of
Statistical Software*, **37**, 1–37.

Friendly, M.; Monette, G. & Fox, J. (2013). [Elliptical Insights:
Understanding Statistical Methods Through Elliptical
Geometry](http://datavis.ca/palers/ellipses-STS402.pdf) *Statistical
Science*, **28**, 1-39.

Friendly, M. & Sigal, M. (2017). [Graphical Methods for Multivariate
Linear Models in Psychological Research: An R
Tutorial.](https://doi.org/10.20982/tqmp.13.1.p020) *The Quantitative
Methods for Psychology*, **13**, 20-45.

Commit message:

add link to pkgdown site

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file and knit again -->
<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-stable-brightgreen.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#stable)
[![CRAN_Status_Badge](http://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/heplots)](http://cran.r-project.org/package=heplots)
[![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/heplots)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=heplots)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPL%20%28%3E=%202%29-brightgreen.svg?style=flat)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/13908453.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/13908453)
<!-- badges: end -->

# heplots <img src="man/figures/logo.png" height="200" style="float:right; height:200px;" />

## **Visualizing Hypothesis Tests in Multivariate Linear Models**

Version 1.4-0

## Description

The `heplots` package provides functions for visualizing hypothesis
tests in multivariate linear models (MANOVA, multivariate multiple
regression, MANCOVA, and repeated measures designs).

HE plots represent sums-of-squares-and-products matrices for linear
hypotheses (**H**) and for error (**E**) using ellipses (in two
dimensions), ellipsoids (in three dimensions), or by line segments in
one dimension. For the theory and applications, see:

-   Fox, Friendly and Monette (2009) for a brief introduction,
-   Friendly (2010) for the application of these ideas to repeated
    measure designs,
-   Friendly, Monette and Fox (2013) for a general discussion of the
    role of elliptical geometry in statistical understanding, and
-   Friendly & Sigal (2017) for an applied R tutorial.

Other topics now addressed here include:

-   robust MLMs, using iteratively re-weighted least squared to
    down-weight observations with large multivariate residuals,
    `robmlm()`.
-   `Mahalanobis()` calculates classical and robust Mahalanobis squared
    distances using MCD and MVE estimators of center and covariance.
-   visualizing tests for equality of covariance matrices in MLMs (Box’s
    M test), `boxM()` and `plot.boxM()`.
-   $\chi^2$ Q-Q plots for MLMs (`cqplot()`) to detect outliers and
    assess multivariate normality of residuals.
-   bivariate coefficient plots showing elliptical confidence regions
    (`coefplot()`).

In this respect, the `heplots` package now aims to provide a wide range
of tools for analyzing and visualizing multivariate response linear
models.

-   The related [`candisc`](http://github.com/friendly/candisc) package
    provides HE plots in **canonical discriminant** space, the space of
    linear combinations of the responses that show the maximum possible
    effects and for canonical correlation in multivariate regression
    designs.

-   Another package,
    [`mvinfluence`](https://friendly.github.io/mvinfluence/), provides
    diagnostic measures and plots for influential observations in MLM
    designs.

Several tutorial vignettes are also included. See
`vignette(package="heplots")`.

## Installation

|                     |                                               |
|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| CRAN version        | `install.packages("heplots")`                 |
| Development version | `remotes::install_github("friendly/heplots")` |

<!-- This installs the package from the source and creates the package vignettes,  -->
<!-- so you will need to have R Tools installed on your system.  [R Tools for Windows](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/) -->
<!-- takes you to the download page for Windows.  [R Tools for Mac OS X](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/macosx/tools/) -->
<!-- has the required programs for Mac OS X. -->

## HE plot functions

The graphical functions contained here all display multivariate model
effects in variable (**data**) space, for one or more response variables
(or contrasts among response variables in repeated measures designs).

-   `heplot()` constructs two-dimensional HE plots for model terms and
    linear hypotheses for pairs of response variables in multivariate
    linear models.

-   `heplot3d()` constructs analogous 3D plots for triples of response
    variables.

-   The `pairs` method, `pairs.mlm()` constructs a scatterplot matrix of
    pairwise HE plots.

-   `heplot1d()` constructs 1-dimensional analogs of HE plots for model
    terms and linear hypotheses for single response variables.

## Other functions

-   `glance.mlm()` extends `broom::glance.lm()` to multivariate response
    models, giving a one-line statistical summary for each response
    variable.

-   `boxM()` Calculates Box’s *M* test for homogeneity of covariance
    matrices in a MANOVA design. A `plot` method displays a visual
    representation of the components of the test. Associated with this,
    `bartletTests()` and `levineTests()` give the univariate tests of
    homogeneity of variance for each response measure in a MLM.

-   `covEllipses()` draw covariance (data) ellipses for one or more
    group, optionally including the ellipse for the pooled within-group
    covariance.

### Repeated measure designs

For repeated measure designs, between-subject effects and within-subject
effects must be plotted separately, because the error terms (**E**
matrices) differ. For terms involving within-subject effects, these
functions carry out a linear transformation of the matrix **Y** of
responses to a matrix **Y M**, where **M** is the model matrix for a
term in the intra-subject design and produce plots of the H and E
matrices in this transformed space. The vignette `"repeated"` describes
these graphical methods for repeated measures designs. (At present, this
vignette is only available at [HE plots for repeated measures
designs](http://www.jstatsoft.org/v37/i04/paper).)

## Datasets

The package also provides a large collection of data sets illustrating a
variety of multivariate linear models of the types listed above,
together with graphical displays. The table below classifies these with
method tags. Their names are linked to the documentation on the
`pkgdown` website, \[<http://friendly.github.io/heplots>\].

<!--
dsets <- vcdExtra::datasets("heplots")[, c("Item", "dim", "Title")]
rowcols <- as.data.frame(stringr::str_split_fixed(dsets$dim,"x", 2))
colnames(rowcols) <- c("rows", "cols")

dsets.table <- cbind("dataset" = dsets$Item, rowcols, "title" =dsets$Title)
knitr::kable(dsets.table)
-->

| dataset                                                                               | rows | cols | title                                                       | tags             |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----:|-----:|:------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------|
| [AddHealth](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/AddHealth.html)               | 4344 |    3 | Adolescent Health Data                                      | MANOVA ordered   |
| [Adopted](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Adopted.html)                   |   62 |    6 | Adopted Children                                            | MMRA repeated    |
| [Bees](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Bees.html)                         |  246 |    6 | Captive and maltreated bees                                 | MANOVA           |
| [Diabetes](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Diabetes.html)                 |  145 |    6 | Diabetes Dataset                                            | MANOVA           |
| [FootHead](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/FootHead.html)                 |   90 |    7 | Head measurements of football players                       | MANOVA contrasts |
| [Headache](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Headache.html)                 |   98 |    6 | Treatment of Headache Sufferers for Sensitivity to Noise    | MANOVA repeated  |
| [Hernior](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Hernior.html)                   |   32 |    9 | Recovery from Elective Herniorrhaphy                        | MMRA candisc     |
| [Iwasaki_Big_Five](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Iwasaki_Big_Five.html) |  203 |    7 | Personality Traits of Cultural Groups                       | MANOVA           |
| [MockJury](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/MockJury.html)                 |  114 |   17 | Effects Of Physical Attractiveness Upon Mock Jury Decisions | MANOVA candisc   |
| [NLSY](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/NLSY.html)                         |  243 |    6 | National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Data                  | MMRA             |
| [NeuroCog](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/NeuroCog.html)                 |  242 |   10 | Neurocognitive Measures in Psychiatric Groups               | MANOVA candisc   |
| [Oslo](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Oslo.html)                         |  332 |   14 | Oslo Transect Subset Data                                   | MANOVA candisc   |
| [Parenting](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Parenting.html)               |   60 |    4 | Father Parenting Competence                                 | MANOVA contrasts |
| [Plastic](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Plastic.html)                   |   20 |    5 | Plastic Film Data                                           | MANOVA           |
| [Pottery2](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Pottery2.html)                 |   48 |   12 | Chemical Analysis of Romano-British Pottery                 | MANOVA candisc   |
| [Probe1](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Probe1.html)                     |   11 |    5 | Response Speed in a Probe Experiment                        | MANOVA repeated  |
| [Probe2](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Probe2.html)                     |   20 |    6 | Response Speed in a Probe Experiment                        | MANOVA repeated  |
| [RatWeight](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/RatWeight.html)               |   27 |    6 | Weight Gain in Rats Exposed to Thiouracil and Thyroxin      | MANOVA repeated  |
| [ReactTime](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/ReactTime.html)               |   10 |    6 | Reaction Time Data                                          | repeated         |
| [Rohwer](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Rohwer.html)                     |   69 |   10 | Rohwer Data Set                                             | MMRA MANCOVA     |
| [RootStock](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/RootStock.html)               |   48 |    5 | Growth of Apple Trees from Different Root Stocks            | MANOVA contrasts |
| [Sake](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Sake.html)                         |   30 |   10 | Taste Ratings of Japanese Rice Wine (Sake)                  | MMRA             |
| [Skulls](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/Skulls.html)                     |  150 |    5 | Egyptian Skulls                                             | MANOVA contrasts |
| [SocGrades](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/SocGrades.html)               |   40 |   10 | Grades in a Sociology Course                                | MANOVA candisc   |
| [SocialCog](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/SocialCog.html)               |  139 |    5 | Social Cognitive Measures in Psychiatric Groups             | MANOVA candisc   |
| [TIPI](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/TIPI.html)                         | 1799 |   16 | Data on the Ten Item Personality Inventory                  | MANOVA candisc   |
| [VocabGrowth](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/VocabGrowth.html)           |   64 |    4 | Vocabulary growth data                                      | repeated         |
| [WeightLoss](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/WeightLoss.html)             |   34 |    7 | Weight Loss Data                                            | repeated         |
| [mathscore](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/mathscore.html)               |   12 |    3 | Math scores for basic math and word problems                | MANOVA           |
| [schooldata](http://friendly.github.io/heplots/reference/schooldata.html)             |   70 |    8 | School Data                                                 | MMRA robust      |

## Examples

This example illustrates HE plots using the classic `iris` data set. How
do the means of the flower variables differ by `Species`? This dataset
was the imputus for R. A. Fisher (1936) to propose a method of
discriminant analysis using data collected by Edgar Anderson (1928).
Though some may rightly deprecate Fisher for being a supporter of
eugenics, Anderson’s `iris` dataset should not be blamed.

A basic HE plot shows the **H** and **E** ellipses for the first two
response variables (here: `Sepal.Length` and `Sepal.Width`). The
multivariate test is significant (by Roy’s test) *iff* the **H** ellipse
projects *anywhere* outside the **E** ellipse.

The positions of the group means show how they differ on the two
response variables shown, and provide an interpretation of the
orientation of the **H** ellipse: it is long in the directions of
differences among the means.

``` r
iris.mod <- lm(cbind(Sepal.Length, Sepal.Width, Petal.Length, Petal.Width) ~ 
                 Species, data=iris)
heplot(iris.mod)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-iris1-1.png" width="70%" />

Contrasts or other linear hypotheses can be shown as well, and the
ellipses look better if they are filled. We create contrasts to test the
differences between `versacolor` and `virginca` and also between
`setosa` and the average of the other two. Each 1 df contrast plots as
degenerate 1D ellipse– a line.

Because these contrasts are orthogonal, they add to the total 2 df
effect of `Species`. Note how the first contrast, labeled `V:V`,
distinguishes the means of *versicolor* from *virginica*; the second
contrast, `S:VV` distinguishes `setosa` from the other two.

``` r
par(mar=c(4,4,1,1)+.1)
contrasts(iris$Species)<-matrix(c(0, -1, 1, 
                                  2, -1, -1), nrow=3, ncol=2)
contrasts(iris$Species)
#>            [,1] [,2]
#> setosa        0    2
#> versicolor   -1   -1
#> virginica     1   -1
iris.mod <- lm(cbind(Sepal.Length, Sepal.Width, Petal.Length, Petal.Width) ~ 
                 Species, data=iris)

hyp <- list("V:V"="Species1","S:VV"="Species2")
heplot(iris.mod, hypotheses=hyp, 
       fill=TRUE, fill.alpha=0.1)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-iris2-1.png" width="70%" />

All pairwise HE plots are produced using the `pairs` method for MLM
objects.

``` r
pairs(iris.mod, hypotheses=hyp, hyp.labels=FALSE,
      fill=TRUE, fill.alpha=0.1)
```

<img src="man/figures/README-iris3-1.png" width="100%" />

## References

Anderson, E. (1928). The Problem of Species in the Northern Blue Flags,
Iris versicolor L. and Iris virginica L. *Annals of the Missouri
Botanical Garden*, **13**, 241–313.

Fisher, R. A. (1936). The Use of Multiple Measurements in Taxonomic
Problems. *Annals of Eugenics*, **8**, 379–388.

Fox, J.; Friendly, M. & Monette, G. (2009). [Visualizing hypothesis
tests in multivariate linear models: The heplots package for
R](http://datavis.ca/palers/FoxFriendlyMonette-2009.pdf) *Computational
Statistics*, **24**, 233-246.

Friendly, M. (2010). [HE plots for repeated measures
designs](http://www.jstatsoft.org/v37/i04/paper). *Journal of
Statistical Software*, **37**, 1–37.

Friendly, M.; Monette, G. & Fox, J. (2013). [Elliptical Insights:
Understanding Statistical Methods Through Elliptical
Geometry](http://datavis.ca/palers/ellipses-STS402.pdf) *Statistical
Science*, **28**, 1-39.

Friendly, M. & Sigal, M. (2017). [Graphical Methods for Multivariate
Linear Models in Psychological Research: An R
Tutorial.](https://doi.org/10.20982/tqmp.13.1.p020) *The Quantitative
Methods for Psychology*, **13**, 20-45.
